# Response Types


<!-- WARNING: THIS FILE WAS AUTOGENERATED! DO NOT EDIT! -->

FastHTML provides multiple HTTP response types that automatically set
the appropriate HTTP content type and handle serialization. The main
response types are:

- FT components
- Redirects (HTTP 303 and other 3xx codes)
- JSON (for API endpoints)
- Streams (EventStream, for Server-Side Events)
- Plaintext

<div>

> **What about websockets?**
>
> Websockets have their own protocol and don’t follow the HTTP
> request/response cycle. To learn more, check out our explanation about
> websockets [here](../explains/websockets.html).

</div>

## Configuration

``` python
from fasthtml.common import *
```

``` python
app,rt = fast_app()
```

`app` and `rt` are the common FastHTML route handler decorators. We
instantiate them with the `fast_app` function.

``` python
cli = Client(app)
```

FastHTML comes with the test client named
[`Client`](https://www.fastht.ml/docs/api/core.html#client). It allows
us to test handlers via a simple interface where `.get()` is a
`HTTP GET` request, `.post()` is a `HTTP POST` request.

## FT Component Response

``` python
@rt('/ft')
def get(): return Html(Div('FT Component Response'))
```

This is the response type you’re probably most familiar with. Here the
route handler returns an FT component, which FastHTML wraps in an HTML
document with a head and body.

``` python
print(cli.get('/ft').text)
```

     <!doctype html>
     <html>
       <div>FT Component Response</div>
     </html>

## Redirect Response

``` python
@rt('/rr')
def get(): return Redirect('https://fastht.ml/')
```

Here in this route handler,
[`Redirect`](https://www.fastht.ml/docs/api/core.html#redirect)
redirects the user’s browser to the new URL ‘https://fastht.ml/’

``` python
resp = cli.get('/rr')
print(resp.url)
print(resp.status_code)
```

    http://testserver/rr
    303

You can see the URL in the response headers and `url` attribute, as well
as a status code of 303.

## JSON Response

``` python
@rt('/json')
def get(): return {'hello': 'world'}
```

This route handler returns a JSON response, where the `content-type` has
been set to .

``` python
resp = cli.get('/json')
print(resp.headers)
print(resp.json())
```

    Headers({'content-length': '17', 'content-type': 'application/json'})
    {'hello': 'world'}

You can see that the Content-Type header has been set to
application/json, and that the response is simply the JSON without any
HTML wrapping it.

## EventStream

``` python
from time import sleep

def counter():
    """Counter is an generator that
        publishes a number every second.
    """
    for i in range(3):
        yield sse_message(f"Event {i}")
        sleep(1)

@rt('/stream')
def get():
    return EventStream(counter())
```

With server-sent events, it’s possible for a server to send new data to
a web page at any time, by pushing messages to the web page. Unlike
WebSockets, SSE can only go in one direction: server to client. SSE is
also part of the HTTP specification unlike WebSockets which uses its own
specification.

``` python
resp = cli.get('/stream')
print(resp.text)
```

    event: message
    data: Event 0

    event: message
    data: Event 1

    event: message
    data: Event 2

Each one of the message events above arrived one second after the
previous message event.

## Plaintext Response

``` python
@rt('/text')
def get(): return 'Hello world'
```

When you return a string from a route handler, you get a plain-text
response.

``` python
print(cli.get('/text').text)
```

    Hello world

Here you can see that the response text is simply the string you
returned, without any HTML wrapping it.
